---
layout: post
title: "Of Aliens and Vegans"
date: 2014-08-25 15:47:59 +0100
comments: true
categories: 
  - science
author: Rebecca Fox
image: /media/aliens.jpg
---
Many people who report having experienced abduction by aliens give horrifyingly graphic descriptions of violence and physical violation. The treatment of animals by humans, which I intend to demonstrate parallels and informs the abductees’ reports, is *real* and<!--more--> perhaps equally horrifying. It includes violence that would also be deemed sexual assault if it were committed by a human against a human. I open with this caveat to prepare my reader for some upsetting content.
 
The idea of extraterrestrial life is neither novel nor an outrageous idea. Humans have speculated about the potential for intelligent life beyond the bounds of the earth since recorded history began. We first imagined spirits and gods beyond the sky, then people on the moon, civilisations on mars, and now beings from beyond our solar system. It seems that there has ever been a mysterious place just a little farther away than our scientific understanding allows us to see, and it may be home to someone – or something.

The Drake equation provided scientists with optimism that extraterrestrial life exists[*](http://www.seti.org/drakeequation "Explanation of the Drake equation from SETI a project inspired in part by the equation"). It is intended to estimate the number of communicative civilisations in our galaxy. Obviously, the equation is highly speculative on account of the many unknown variables and is described by SETI as a ‘tool for stimulating intellectual curiosity.’ It hints that, given the sheer size of the universe, our intuition that we may not be alone is probably correct – even if the chances of two communicative species being close enough to notice each other is near zero.

Humans have always speculated about alien life and have been reporting seeing strange things in the sky for centuries, but the modern phenomenon of people reporting alien abductions began in 1964. The first fictional depiction of an alien abduction was in the film *Invaders from Mars* (1953)[*](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0045917 "Invaders from Mars IMDB entry"). It obviously caught the public imagination because many more movies followed in the same vein, and in the early sixties a series of episodes of *The Outer Limits* about alien abductions were being shown[*](http://www.jasoncolavito.com/alien-abduction-at-the-outer-limits.html "Three episodes of The Outer Limits are particularly relevant to the Hill’s accounts. ‘The Invisibles’ aired Feb 3rd 1964, ‘The Bellero Shield’ aired Feb 10th  and ‘The Children of Spider County’ aired Feb 17th – only five days before Barney Hills hypnosis session. Further discussion of The Outer Limit’s potential influence on the Hill’s abduction report is presented in Jason Colavito's article")[*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_The_Outer_Limits_episodes "a summary of the relevant episodes can be found in the Wikipedia article").
 
##Alien Kidnappers
 
The very first report of an alien abduction came from Betty and Barney Hill, who were familiar with the reported sightings of flying saucers and the entertainment media featuring abductions. Betty was a ‘UFO enthusiast’. The Hills thought they had experienced an abduction but were unable to recall the details, so they underwent hypnosis in order to access their memories of what happened to them. The following is an extract from the transcript of one of Barney’s hypnosis sessions in which he describes the moment before he was abducted.
 
> ...evil face…. He looks like a German Nazi. He has a black scarf around his neck, dangling over his right shoulder … Oh! I feel like a rabbit!” “Why do you feel like a rabbit?” Dr Simon. asks. “I was hunting for rabbits in Virginia. And this cute little bunny went into a bush that was not very big …. And the poor little bunny thought he was safe…. He was just hiding behind a little stalk which meant security to him, when I pounced on him, and captured the poor little bunny who thought he was safe. Funny I thought of that. Right there out in the field. I felt like a rabbit[*](http://www.amazon.co.uk/Abducted-People-Believe-Kidnapped-Aliens/dp/067402401X "Drawn from the comprehensive book Abducted: How People Come to Believe They Were Kidnapped by Aliens by Susan A. Clancy found in my edition pub 2005 on page 97").
 
Here, in the first alien ever abduction report, the victim himself parallels the experience of a rabbit being hunted with his experience of being abducted. Years later, this theme is still running through abduction reports, one of the most well known being Whitley Strieber’s, who describes his first abduction:
 
>I had been captured like a wild animal on December 26, rendered helpless and dragged out of my den into the night[*](http://www.amazon.co.uk/Communion-True-Story-Whitley-Strieber/dp/0380703882 "Drawn From Strieber’s ‘autobiographical’ novel Communion found in my edition pub 1988 on page 104").
 
Under hypnosis Betty Hill recounted undergoing a medical examination by her abductors, which included a needle being inserted into her navel. A similar operation had been performed on one of the female characters in *Invaders From Mars*. Betty interpreted this procedure as a pregnancy test. Since the Hill’s abduction report millions[*](http://www.amazon.co.uk/Aliens-Why-They-Are-Here/dp/0743256859 "In his book Aliens: Why They are Here Bryan Appleyard details surveys conducted in the United States that conclude 2% of the American population ‘have experienced events consistent with those that abductees experienced before they knew they were abductees.’ In my edition pub 2005 page 64")[*](http://www.csicop.org/si/show/abduction_by_aliens_or_sleep_paralysis "A brilliant skeptical analysis of these numbers by Susan Blackmore") of other people have reported alien abductions many of which follow an outline unintentionally scripted by the Hills. This is unsurprising since their reported encounters are published as a book, inspired a documentary movie and are disseminated into pop culture inspiring many more books, movies and television series. 

Bryan Appleyard, in his book *Aliens: Why They Are Here*, provides a synopsis of the typical reported encounter:
 
>The basic elements are now familiar from the Hills and from thousands of other similar cases and there use in books and films. Essentially, these are: the UFO, the missing time, the powerlessness of the humans, the control of the aliens over our machinery, usually, as in the Hills’ case, a car, the medical examination and/or intervention with its focus on the reproductive organs, the inside of the craft, the imposed amnesia later unlocked by hypnotism and the subsequent physical and mental effects on the abductees[*](http://www.amazon.co.uk/Aliens-Why-They-Are-Here/dp/0743256859 "Drawn from Appleyard’s book Aliens; Why They are Here In my edition pub 2006 page 63").
 
The reasons why people become convinced that they have been abducted by aliens can broadly be dived into two categories: the physical and the psychological. Sleep paralysis and unexplained medical symptoms (such as strange rashes or marks on the body) are two of the physical experiences that may prompt someone to suspect they have been victim to an alien adduction. In her book *Abducted*, Clancy summarises some of the psychological stimuluses’ for forming such a belief:
 
>I am arguing that alien-abduction memories are best understood as resulting from a blend of fantasy-proneness, memory distortion, culturally available scripts, sleep hallucinations, and scientific illiteracy, aided and abetted by the suggestions and reinforcements of hypnotherapy[*](http://www.amazon.co.uk/Abducted-People-Believe-Kidnapped-Aliens/dp/067402401X "Drawn from Clancy’s Abducted: How People Come to Believe They Were Kidnapped by Aliens found in my edition pub 2005 on page 138").
 
Clancy goes on to suggest that a more important question is not why the purported abductees believe they are abducted but why they, in the words of Fox Mulder, ‘want to believe’. Her answer is that people who report being abducted by aliens are engaging in the most human of behaviors; searching for meaning… and often unwittingly manufacturing it.
 
This article is concerned with the thematic origin of abductee's experiences, rather than the psychological or physiological causes. Like art, these experiences are woven from a tapestry of pop culture, politics and general human anxieties.

Clancy succinctly describes this process:

>When you’re looking for the cause of an anomalous experience, your search is limited to the set of explanations you’ve actually heard of[*](http://www.amazon.co.uk/Abducted-People-Believe-Kidnapped-Aliens/dp/067402401X "Drawn from Clancy’s Abducted: How People Come to Believe They Were Kidnapped by Aliens found in my edition pub 2005 on page 38").

I would go further, and propose that when manufacturing a narrative to explain one's experience, one can only draw from the ideas already present in your culture. The reported alien abduction encounters do not seem to be the products of actual alien interactions; rather, they mirror their parent culture's preoccupations, perhaps reflecting them even more clearly than any art because they are not self-consciously edited.

Maybe more importantly, the ‘abduction narrative’ is collaborative. Every year, many people add their own stories to the record and support or dismiss aspects of their fellow abductee’s accounts.  Abductees work together to drear a well-honed myth that resonates with not only the thousands who believe in the alien abduction phenomenon but also many millions more who consume the fictional material inspired by it. The themes that are made explicit in this narrative are critically important to the people of our age, and the anxieties surrounding our treatment of animals are unsubtly apparent.
 
##Alien Experiments
 
Reports of abduction usually feature a medical examination, conducted while the human subject is rendered immobile. Appleyard notes that there is a recurring sexual theme in many abduction accounts, and the medical examination is usually focused on the reproductive organs. One of the most famous alleged abductees is the author Whitley Strieber who recalled his experiences under hypnosis and later recorded them in his autobiographical[*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whitley_Strieber#Communion_and_.22The_Visitors.22 "Amusingly, Strieber’s thrilling book Communion was originally top of the New York Times non-fiction bestseller list until it was removed from the non-fiction and placed in the fiction category – much to Strieber’s displeasure. In the fiction category it also rose into the top ten of the bestseller list. There is an overview of the book and it’s reception on Wikipedia") novel *Communion*.  One graphic assault:
 
>The next thing I knew l was being shown an enormous and extremely ugly object, gray and scaly, with a sort of network of wires on the end. It was at least a foot long, narrow, and triangular in structure. They inserted this thing into my rectum. It seemed to swarm into me as if it had a life of its own. Apparently its purpose was to take samples, possibly of fecal matter, but at the time I had the impression that I was being raped, and for the first time I felt anger[*](http://www.amazon.co.uk/Communion-True-Story-Whitley-Strieber/dp/0380703882 "Drawn From Strieber’s ‘autobiographical’ novel Communion found in my edition pub 1988 on page 21").

Strieber’s account features an anal probe of the kind that has become ubiquitous and subject to some dark humour[*](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cartman_Gets_an_Anal_Probe "Perhaps best exemplified in the pilot episode of Trey parker and Matt Stone’s South Park ‘Cartman Gets an Anal Probe’ – synopsis here"). The adoption of this motif both by pop culture and the abductee community suggests that it has a resonance with the general public and not just Strieber himself. 

UPTO Fear of violence is deeply embedded into the human psyche this fear ideally protects us from dangerous people and situations, but it also leads us to excess anxiety which we must manufacture scenarios to explain. This is the kind of effect that occurs when we imagine another pedestrian walking behind us on a dark street is holding a knife, or that shape in the corner of a dark bedroom is a hunched intruder. We are always alert for danger and misidentify non-threatening things as dangerous due to apophenia. [FN (13) an effect which Michael Shermer dubs ‘patternicity’ he introduced the term in this article for Scientific American: http://www.scientificamerican.com/article/patternicity-finding-meaningful-patterns/ and explores it further in his 2006 book The Believing Brain] 

But it works the other way around too- we experience an excess of anxiety and misidentify it as a correct assessment of a threatening situation and then imagine a threat that would explain our fear. This is why after watching a horror movie we are more likely to jump at sudden noises or imagine we see monsters lurking behind doors, our anxiety is seeking confirmation of its aptness. In The Believing Brain Michael Shermer speculates on the evolutionary origins of apophenia (which he calls patternicity) pointing out the obvious selection advantages that a person seeing danger where there was none would have over a person not seeing danger when it was present. Similarly it is easy to see how evolution could have selected for the human trait of being wary after experiencing a frightening encounter. Strieber’s excess anxiety took shape in an alien abduction and an anal probe, however I would argue that Strieber’s expressions of his fear are merely window dressing for a simpler human fear that of loss of power and control over his own body. What better example of this loss of control than rape. [FN (14) Rape Trauma Syndrome is a name given to a cluster of psychological effects seen in rape victims many of which are caused by the radical disempowerment usually experienced during rape the Wikipedia article on RTS gives an overview: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rape_trauma_syndrome] The reason other alleged abductees remember being probed like Strieber and before him Barney Hill [FN (15) Amongst other invasive procedures Barney Hill recounted a tube or cylinder being inserted into his anus when under hypnosis, details of his account can be found on the Wikipedia article for the Hill’s abduction http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Betty_and_Barney_Hill_abduction#Barney.27s_sessions] is not only because of Strieber’s skill as a writer the acting prowess of Christopher Walken who played Strieber in the film version, but because they sensed the common fear of being dominated.

##Alien Farmers
 
Though anal probing has become a well-known motif in abduction reports it is actually far less prevalent than more traditional sexual assaults. Many abductee reports detail a forced medical examination that focuses on the reproductive organs. [FN (16) Appleyard and Clancy refer to this focus on the sexual organs in respectively Aliens and Abducted]A large percentage of these alleged abductees either claim to know or suspect that the reason for this medical intervention is to extract semen or ovum for further experimentation and possible breeding.

It is an unfortunate but constant aspect of the abduction phenomenon that aliens take eggs and sperm from people on a routine basis. For women it involves the introduction of instruments that take either recently matured eggs or invade the ovary for follicles. There is some evidence to suggest that the aliens can accomplish rapid egg maturation and release through Mindscan for harvesting purposes.

Harvesting can be accomplished at any age. For men, sperm is extracted mechanically by a device placed around the genital area. Sometimes these devices are small and portable, other times they are on carts or attached to the wall.
[FN (17) this extract is taken from the International Centre for Abduction Research’s description of a ‘typical abduction event’: http://www.ufoabduction.com/straighttalk.htm]
A rape that culminates in the attacker taking control of their victims DNA is perhaps the most disempowering experience our brains could conjure.
 
The typical alien medical examination is conducted while the subject is immobilized, then they are subject to invasive extraction or implantation of biological material via their sexual organs. The experience is usually recalled as painful and humiliating but sometimes the aliens are benevolent enough to induce a dream-like state so their human subject is not conscious of mental or physical discomfort. When reading these accounts and Strieber’s above I was struck by the gruesome similarities to the artificial insemination of cattle that is practiced regularly in animal agriculture.
 
To impregnate female cows the farmer must first restrain them, this is usually done not by telepathic alien paralysis but by forcing them into a cattle crush or squeeze chute, more colloquially known as a ‘rape rack’. A cattle crush is a large metal cage that fits snugly around the cow’s body rendering her unable to move of her own volition. This protects the farmer from injury and the cow from hurting herself in her struggle to escape. Artificial insemination of cows is performed by the inseminator inserting their hand and arm into the cow’s rectum, they then reach down and feel through her rectal wall the position of her cervix, scooping underneath they grasp the cervix firmly.  In an instructional text provided for famers the inseminator is warned:
 
 ‘…the cow will exert a fair amount of pressure against the arm and hands- she will try to expel them’
 
[FN (18) http://www.docstoc.com/docs/81854577/The-Process-of-Artificial-Insemination]
 
Because rectal walls are not particularly elastic the farmer is advised to take care not to rupture the wall. If her rectal wall is ruptured the cow will inevitably develop peritonitis a painful and eventually fatal disease, therefore if rupture of the rectal wall is suspected the farmer is advised to arrange a prompt slaughter. Grasping the cervix the inseminator takes a large syringe loaded with bull semen and inserts it with the other hand into her vagina. It seems there is a bit of a knack to knowing where to exactly to deposit the load but when the appropriate place is located the syringe is depressed and withdrawn. I go into such explicit and unpleasant detail to demonstrate the similarities of the artificial insemination of cattle with the ordeals that abductee reports detail.
 
Imagine the vulnerability, fear and agony a human would experience being subject to the procedure outlined above… it seems some people have, extremely vividly. Connie Renblosser describes her alien abductors as rapists and recounts a terrifyingly typical abduction experience:
 
I was physically paralyzed, but my mind was alert. I can remember being taken inside the metallic spaceship and carried by four small, hairless beings with large eyes up a dimly lit corridor. (… )The spacemen carried me into a room where they laid me on a metal gurney. (…) After that, the agony began. I can remember that he inserted something into my womb. I could feel it wig-
gling around inside me, but I couldn't move, I couldn't stop it. The pain
was so terrible I passed out.
 
[FN (19) Reblosser’s account is drawn from UFO BBS a shockingly poorly designed site on which countless UFO and abduction reports are catalogued http://www.ufo-bbs.com/txt3/2111.htm]
 
When our minds are left to conjure the most horrific scenario; we imagine something very similar to what we do to millions of female cows every day. The ultimate human fear is that we might be treated in the way which we treat others.
 
##Human Livestock
 
The procedures to which humans subject livestock and those abductee reports claim are administered to humans are thought by many to have similar aims. In this way the fear of individual powerlessness is projected onto the entire human race by imagining the earth as either a source of livestock for aliens, an experimental project or a giant farming enterprise.
 
Zecharia Sitchin was one of the first to suggest the hypothesis that humans were specifically bred for alien purposes. [FN (20) Sitchin introduced this theory in his 1976 book The Twelfth Planet, a synopsis of his ideas is available on his Wikipedia page: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zecharia_Sitchin] He claims that ancient Sumerian texts recount the story of aliens, which he calls the Anunnaki, coming to earth 400,000 years ago to source earth minerals. To assist them with this project they genetically engineered homo sapiens sapiens as sophisticated beasts of burden to work in their mines. [FN (21) Sitchin’s theories rests on his misunderstanding of our evolutionary past in The Twelfth Planet  (chapter 12) he asserts that ‘homo sapiens sapiens ‘appeared inexplicably’ and that ‘scholars have no explanation’ for this event. His alien hypothesis explains an oddity that does not exist as evolutionary biologists have a clear understanding of our evolutionary past] This idea has been embraced by a whole community of people who believe in ‘ancient astronauts’ and brought to the wider public recently by the discovery channel’s hugely popular program; ‘Ancient Aliens’. [FN (22) Ancient Aliens is a television series that features the main proponents of the ancient astronaut hypothesis, such as Giorgio A. Tsoukalos, David Childress, Erich von Däniken, Steven Greer, and Nick Pope.] One of the more entertaining proponents of theory that humans are unknowingly enslaved to extra terrestrials (or possibly extra-dimensionals) is ex-footballer and television presenter David Icke who refers to those people who are not aware of their own enslavement as ‘sheeple’, a term that recalls George Orwell’s animal farm in which the sheep are a metaphor for the easily manipulated masses. Icke opens the first chapter of his book ‘Children of the Matrix; how an interdimensional race has controlled the world for thousands of years – and still does’ with a quote from Gothe:
 
 ‘There are none so enslaved as those who falsely believe they are free’
 
[FN (23) Icke highlights this quote to explain the inability or unwillingness of the ‘sheeple’ (that’s you and I, dear reader) to realise the truth of his message]
 
Icke’s dense text contains many genuinely insightful observations on human society interspersed with more incredible claims. His overall thesis is encapsulated in the title and appeals to the fear expressed by many proponents of the ancient astronaut theory; that humanity is a slave race bred for the purposes of a more powerful culture. If sheep, cows, pigs or any number of ‘livestock’ animals were capable of having this cognition, they would be correct.
 
##Human Guilt
 
On the rare occasions that there is a report of humanity turning the tables and capturing an alien such as was made by Ray Santilli when he presented his video footage of a supposed alien autopsy  [FN (24) This footage emerged in the early nineties and intrigued and terrified me at the time, re-watching it now I am shocked at my own naivety but I was still a child and CGI effects had not yet distorted my expectations for realism in film: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NwyeK36Gh-s&oref=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNwyeK36Gh-s&has_verified=1] human scientists are said to examine and dissect their victim in a manner just as barbaric as the aliens purportedly treat their captives. In the movie E.T. we sympathise with the titular character as he flees from ironically inhuman scientists dressed in white robes and facemasks. Instead of retaliating maybe it would be better to lay down the imaginary scalpels and call a truce with our subconscious guilt.
 
I do not think that repressed guilt for the way humans treat animals produces the conviction in so many people that they have been abducted by aliens, what I propose is that the knowledge of the way humans treat other terrestrial species informs our conception of how aliens would treat us. The abduction narrative is shaped by many human anxieties, one of the ingredients in this cocktail is guilt for and horror of the animal suffering caused by humanity. Once a purported abductee draws this analogy they revive the feeling of unease in those who hear their testimony. The people who go on to believe they have been abducted or create fiction based on this theme express their own, now heightened, guilty horror.
 
The myth of alien abduction allows us to empathise with the animals we abuse for our own pleasure, each report acts as an outlet for expression of our moral uncertainty for when we put ourselves in the place of the animals there is no doubt that what they/we are doing is wrong. In his short essay Rhys Southan argues that the analogy of aliens exploiting humans is a poor one because humans have much different cognitive faculties than the animals that we exploit. He suggests that this thought experiment (of imagining ourselves as animals being exploited by aliens) is misleading:
 
 It wants to make us see things from the animals’ point of view, yet fudges it by putting us in the animals’ place while maintaining our human cultural beliefs and cognitive abilities.
 
[FN (25) Southan’s article for Aeon magazine is wryly entertaining and well thought out, his observations that even vegan aliens could decimate humanity by destroying our habitat is highly pertinent. Still I’d prefer an invasion from Southan’s vegan aliens than the kidnapping, probing alternative. http://aeon.co/magazine/philosophy/rhys-southan-vegan-invasion/]
 
I agree that the analogy is far from perfect but it is an important one simply because it appeals to so many people and is expressed in such an unusual manner.
 
By imagining that we are victims of alien abductions or that inter-dimensional reptilians have enslaved the whole human species we alleviate some of the guilty feelings about what we do to animals. Unfortunately the narrative that helps us to empathise with our victims dose not provoke us into treating them any better but allows us to wallow deeper in our own imagined victimhood, when we should be asking the animals the same question Whitley Strieber reports the aliens asked him:
"What can we do to help you stop screaming?"
[FN (26) Drawn From Strieber’s novel Communion found in my edition pub 1988 on page 19]

It only remains to say- wake up sheeple- go vegan!
